look I'm involved with politics because
I want to deal with real things I'm
involved with philosophy because I want
to deal with real things in the English
language the word semantics has taken on
a negative dismissive contemptuous
quality you know feels oh this is just
about semantics look I don't want to
argue about semantics and in a sense we
all know what they mean I don't want to
just quit above the meaning of a word I
don't want to get stuck on this even
though for many of the political and
philosophical problems we may want to
engage with there may be a necessary
preliminary stage of the discussion
where we have to agree on the meanings
of terms do you support intervention in
Cambodia in order to establish a working
democracy hmm how do you define
intervention how do you define democracy
especially in terms of their border with
Vietnam how do you define Cambodia well
there may be some the devil may be in
the details in terms of the the
definitions of words when we we first
sit down to to discuss these things on a
deeper level in ways seen and unseen the
definitions of words inform the ethical
decisions we make how we perceive a
moral problem or whether we fail to
perceive a moral problem as existing at
all most people watching this video grew
up buying cow milk in a glass jar and
you probably grew up being taught that
it was really morally significant to
take the time to wash the glass
container and place it in a recycling
bin that this was morally significant
this was good and of course it's
ecologically significant and you were
not taught to question at all what the
white substance was inside the glass jar
whether it was milk or yogurt you
weren't taught to question ethically the
meat and dairy industry and at some
point your life you stick those
questions
when you challenge the status quo on a
deep level linguistically and culturally
people assume you're challenging it on
the basis of a belief it's very easy
it's very easy to say it's very easy to
slip into the addition of saying I
believe in veganism but there's also a
sense in which without dwelling on
semantics we have to clarify it we have
to point out veganism is not a belief
veganism is not something I can lose my
faith in because it isn't a faith to
begin with unencumbered by faith
unencumbered by belief unencumbered by
any kind of cultural tradition or set of
assumptions I can stand in a grassy
field and look at a cow grazing in the
grass and I can recognize the absurdity
the absolute absurdity of a human being
getting down on their hands and knees
shimmying across the grass wiggling
through a mud puddle and then trying to
suck the milk out of that cow's udder
what what could be more observed and yet
it's precisely through cultural
accretion it's precisely through layers
on layers of belief of faith that we
come to regard the milk in a glass
bottle as something necessary normal and
natural even as a positive part of our
our civilization and our cultural
identity certainly still today people in
New Zealand
I think the Dutch and the French but
maybe especially the people in New
Zealand they're proud of their local
dairy products proud to export their
butter are proud of their local cheese
so on and so forth right and yet if you
just place it in this context this
microcosm this really small scale
example of saying would you yourself get
down on your hands and knees go across
the grass and suck the milk out of that
cow's udder its they'd say no that's
ridiculous
if someone else did it you watch them do
it what would you think you'd say that
that's absurd
that's ridiculous if someone else did it
and then they put the milk in a glass
bottle and they hand it to you would you
drink it they do that every day so how
can this make sense if you're just
removed from this same moral decision
the same the same ethical absurdity by a
few steps by a few steps of estrangement
right as the microcosm you scale it up I
just heard a new report I can give a
link below this video again I gave the
link on patreon already a guy went
through and did the math and looked more
carefully than ever before at the
ecological damage done by the meat and
dairy industries and compared it to the
damage done by soy milk production of
equivalent vegan foods like taking soy
beans turn them into soy mo because that
also does some ecological harm but it
does dramatically less and among the
fact that he puts out he came he came to
the number 73 percent what what does the
73 percent mean the amount of land that
we need to support and sustain human
civilization the land use we require
could be reduced by 73% if the whole
human species were to start being vegan
well the point here is not that it's
unlikely or improbable for the whole
world to become vegan the point is again
you scale that up you look at the
irrationality of it the irrationality of
the one person on the grass drinking out
of the cow's udder the irrationality of
a million people of a billion people
drinking cow milk out of a glass bottle
and so on and so forth the ecological
devastation the cost of s what do I have
to believe in what faith do I have to
have to come to the subjective judgment
that there must be a better way right
questions of of better and worse or
don't require you to have faith in
anything I can stand in front of a
painting and say this painting is better
than that painting over there right it
does
mean I believe in a heaven that the
paintings go to after they die where
there's a divine judge who decides which
painting is really good and which one
it's just kind of mediocre it doesn't
mean that I believe there's any
objective standard existing anywhere
that there's a transcendent morality
that there's a fixed objective reality
to good and evil on this earth under the
earth floating in the sky created by a
god or what have you all right we can be
aware that our subjective judgments of
this painting are merely that they're
our own subjective values we can be
aware that the value of the painting if
it's worth a million dollars is the
product of a thousand different people
each having their own subjective
judgment or coming together a cultural
convention think about the meaning that
we're convention a convention is people
coming together still you can have a
cultural convention where we decide
directly and indirectly this painting is
something that has tremendous value and
all these things are subjective there is
no objective measure for what's a good
or a bad painting but I'm not gonna
stand back and say Oh Who am I to judge
if I'm a nihilist if I don't believe
these things I don't have faith Who am I
to dare to have opinion about what is a
good or a bad painting okay
what do I have to believe in to be vegan
the answer is absolutely nothing and I'm
going to take a next step here and tell
you sincerely it's better for you it's
better for us it's better for the
movement it's better for everyone if you
can be vegan believing absolutely
nothing if you can take up this cause
with no basis in faith or belief and I
know that you may have grown up thinking
that all good things begin with belief
and that belief is necessary for every
great in moral undertaking but it's not
I'm making this video because an old
colleague in the vegan movement has gone
back to eating meat and she went back to
eating meat after losing her faith in a
particular religion a mainstream
religion not so different from
Catholicism or Judaism that religion
does have some cult-like aspects most of
them do
actually if you're an atheist or a
nihilist looking it from the outside
it's easy for an outsider to see what's
what's cult-like about it and I
understand her reason for giving up
veganism is not that the veganism was a
side effect of her faith which it might
be for a Buddhist for a Buddhist for
example they might believe in
reincarnation and then they become vegan
because they see in the cows and the
sheep and the pigs reincarnated people
and vice-versa that people have been
reincarnated from cows and sheep and
pigs this idea existed in ancient Greece
and ancient Rome with no connection to
Buddhism
obviously in the world today Buddhism is
probably the major voice for this this
belief some Hindus also have this kind
of belief in in reincarnation and they
may become vegetarian or vegan for that
reason and then but then if they lose
faith in that they'll go back to eating
meats because their engagement with
veganism is based on belief and mine is
not so for this particular this
particular woman she lost her faith in
religion and what she saw in veganism
were the same problems the same flaws
the same shortcomings that she had just
recently started to criticize him
religion itself she saw veganism as a
faith-based movement proselytizing
trying to convince others to share in
its own moral standards I can sympathize
she has a point but I think she's dead
wrong the problem of veganism is
ultimately that it isn't just a
lifestyle choice it isn't just an ethic
I can engage in for my own health for my
own ethics for my own ecology the
concept of my own ecology is already
surreal right um and in this one sense
I'd like to answer you know this problem
by pointing to a comparison with with
speed limits it can't possibly be
sufficient for me to decide to just
drive my own car more slowly and
conversely if I have this belief if I
have this idea that I want everyone to
drive their car more slowly maybe for
public safety maybe for
Recology maybe for other reasons I look
around and I think you know what I
really want is to have a little metal
side by the little metal sign by the
side of the road with a two-digit number
painted on it and that everyone do what
I'm doing I don't just want to drive
more slowly myself I want all of society
to to recognize this value is that going
to be based on the belief that speed
limits are objectively real no it's not
that there is an angel in heaven that
came up with the number 65 and said 65
miles per hour has to be the limit it's
not that there's any objective
scientific fact I can reach for it's not
that there's an objectively real value
under the earth or in the sky created
outside of human perception just as
subjectively as I can look at a painting
on the wall and give it a rating between
one and 100 I can look at a stretch of
highway and try to assign it a speed
limit from 0 to 100 mm to some extent I
can be completely aware that this is
subjective I can be aware that it's
inter subjective that other people are
gonna have their own subjective opinions
and that can be aware that it's a
convention again a cultural convention
or a convention in the more literal
sense that we're gonna have a conference
we're gonna invite a hundred different
experts to come and talk about what this
speed limit should be on different roads
and then we're gonna fix them for
everyone to to obey okay I understand
the way in which this particular person
looks at veganism and sees it as a
religious mission trying to convert
others to its faith right but veganism
does not rest on does not rely on faith
and again it should not and ought not
rely on faith because if your veganism
is based on faith in these things then
your veganism will collapse along with
your faith in those other things
veganism can proceed just as rationally
and openly and with as much critical
thinking and dissent and and what have
you it can proceed just as nihilistic
aliy as the man standing in that field
who sees the cow and thinks how can we
justify getting down on our hands and
needs it can proceed just as openly and
rationally and sigh
nihilistic aliy as looking at the
knock-on consequences for how much land
we're using how much water we're using
those ecological impacts and say there's
got to be a better way and we can
proceed in the same way in the pursuit
of social change than the pursuit of
bringing over others to our side as
someone who says look you know for all
these reasons ethics ecology human
health and safety there's got to be a
better way to organize their society and
guys you know it's not enough for me
personally to live in this ethically
spear where it's not enough for me to
just drive below the speed limits we've
got us come together agree to a standard
instead of a system so that all of us
can obey these feelings the same way
that we've come together in society and
decided hey you know what it's not
enough for me to quit smoking we want
everyone to quit smoking we want the
next generation for fewer people or
possibly nobody to starts moving in this
way there's an ongoing pursuit of
cultural change that we can all be
engaged in but is veganism a religion is
veganism just another faith that should
be criticized and rejected because it
rests on belief my answer to that is no
and moreover if you have become vegan
because of a belief in something
supernatural like reincarnation or
something your yoga teacher taught you
or or what have you I think it's fair to
say that you're now in the difficult
position of having to come having come
to the correct conclusion from a false
premise and you're gonna face a real
challenge I guess it's easier to go from
doing the right thing for the wrong
reasons to doing the right thing for the
right reasons that's probably an easier
transition to make but the role of faith
in human psychology is so powerful that
it seems to me when people are doing the
right things for the wrong reasons
as soon as they stop believing in heaven
in life after death in reincarnation
they go from a state of doing the right
things for the wrong reasons to
having no interest in doing the right
thing at all that's not what nihilism is
that's not what nihilism means what
nihilism means is that we're aware that
concepts of good and evil and better and
worse are subjective that they begin
with me in the same way that a painter
sits down and makes a painting starting
with a blank canvas those values aren't
something that exists in a real
objective fixed form in the outside
world for me to discover there's
something for me to create they're a
form of self-expression and maybe I can
find other people who share my values or
think I have a good idea if you can find
other people who think having a 65 mile
per hour speed limit having a speed
limit on the side of the road is gonna
save lives is going to be a great idea
even though we've inherited this
language we've inherited these cultural
traditions such that you know we speak
in terms of do you believe in speed
limits I understand that's our normal
way of expressing ourselves but there's
a very meaningful very important sense
in which speed limits have nothing
whatsoever to do with faith or belief
and there's no reason why a nihilist
project speed limits there's no conflict
between the two there's a very real
sense in which faith in veganism or
belief in veganism is a very misleading
construction of the problem the point is
we're people who for whatever reason
can't believe in the excuses made for
carnism any longer we can't believe in
the cultural traditions values or
beliefs that taught us that drinking the
milk out of that bottle is something
natural necessary and normal and as soon
as you start questioning that you know
this great horizon opens us to ups to us
where you're looking ahead to the next
300 years and saying what is the
potential for human cultural change as
soon as we shrug off our attachment to
these traditions